Oh, okay.
Cool. Just go, right.
How are you? Well, this afternoon slash this evening?
Mm-hmm.
Alright, we are ready to go.
And we have the Citizen Advice Bureau.
That's, that's your, is it? That's me.
Oh, welcome to the table when you're ready.
Straight to what? Ah, excellent.
Well, um, good afternoon and welcome to the Social Service
and Community, uh, sub Select Committee.
Uh, so I'm Jom.
I'll be chair this, um, this afternoon and, uh, Mau P here.
And we have Ryman My Cup King online. Um, so look, welcome.
This is the, um, hearings in the redress system for abuse
and ke and we have 10 minutes with you this afternoon.
Um, so the time is yours.
Thank you. This feels like a long table at the moment.
Um, so Koto, um, called Sasha Green.
I'm, um, presenting on behalf of Citizens
of Vice Bureau New Zealand.
Um, I just wanna pause for a second
'cause I'm aware of survivors who are in the room, survivors
who are probably watching online and others,
and just to acknowledge those who, um, who this is about,
those who have passed also
and haven't had the benefit of, um, our
work towards, um, a, a redress system.
Um, so citizens of Vice Bureau, hopefully,
you know, our organization.
We have 80 sites around the country, over 2000 volunteers
delivering free information
and advice by phone, um, online
and face-to-face.
Um, we provide free service, um,
to people across Al Turo.
And CAB is a place that survivors people
with lived experience in their whanau come to get support
with issues impacting their lives.
These inquiries cover a diverse range of topics
and include, um, most notably redress as an issue
that people come to us seeking help for.
Um, we also deliver an information advice service
to people in prison with 23 of our ca AABs answering, um,
calls directly from all corrections facilities
and like all frontline CAB service.
Um, that service receives no direct
central government funding.
Uh, we also seek to work alongside survivor led groups
and to be informed by the views of survivors from our mahi.
We are aware of the challenges
and barriers people face in knowing
and acting on their rights.
Um, we support the establishment of a fear accessible
and survivor centered redress system for people
who experienced abuse when they should have been being cared
for by the state and by faith-based institutions.
Given our commitment to a fair, accessible,
and survivor centered red system,
we cannot support this bill.
As it stands, the redress system is an opportunity
for the crown to uphold the mana of survivors
and come with humility and recognition of failure.
Failure that warranted a national apology
by the crown just over a year ago, to take steps
to acknowledge and respond to the harm survivors experienced
to restore their dignity and wellbeing
and provide meaningful remedies in a trauma-informed way.
Instead, this bill focuses on creating barriers
to financial, redress, penalizing people,
and protecting the state from being held to the genuineness
of an apology at a later date, we oppose this bill
and urge the committee to recommend significant redrafting
to ensure the system reflects the intent
of the Royal Commission of Inquiry
and the expectations of survivors.
Um, I also just want to note the timing
and process of consultation.
Hopefully the committee received our letter.
I know it was a little bit late in the piece for anything,
um, to change, but the timing of, um,
consultation on this bill lining up with the National Day
of, um, reflection
and remembrance meant that many, um, survivors, um,
were limited in their ability to engage fully
with this process.
And it may not have even been on their radar
'cause they were, um, taking that time to
prepare for, um, major events
around the country throughout November.
So we do urge the committee to consider reopening, um,
the consultation process to allow for genuine
and accessible engagement.
Um, our key concern in this bill is the presumption against
financial redress for survivors
who have committed serious violent or sexual offenses.
We oppose this measure and submit that it is unjust
and discriminatory to make access
to redress conditional on a person's criminal history rather
than on the state's wrongdoing.
The shift's focus from recognizing harm caused
and care to judging survivors worthiness of compensation
that contradicts the Royal Commission
of Inquiries recommendations, which explicitly call
for redress the redress system to include survivors
with criminal histories.
Um, further the, um, this presumption
breaches the Bill of Rights Act
and, um, as an example of double jeopardy, where people
who have already been penalized
and served their time face further punishment, um,
by being limited in their access to financial redress
that can have an impact for them
and for their, for their children, for their whanau.
Um, the retrospective application of the presumption
to claims made on or
after 9th of May is also problematic,
especially given the poor communication about the changes
and the barriers survivors already face in
accessing information.
Um, the messaging already has caused confusion with some
agencies implying that there is a blanket ban for any person
who has, uh, criminal record.
Um, in our work with people in prison, we see the barriers,
um, that people face, uh, in, um,
accessing the system as it stands, including, um,
accessing redress that they're entitled to.
Um, this is about limited access to personal records,
digital exclusion, um, difficulties in communication.
So we would like to see a trauma informed system
that addresses these practical barriers
and does not compound them.
We are also concerned about the bill's provisions preventing
apologies given in the redress context from being used
as evidence in civil proceedings.
Um, while the intention is to,
to encourage meaningful apologies, this may weaken,
weaken survivors access to justice limiting their ability
to rely on such apologies where they choose
to pursue civil remedies.
The, um, presumption also disproportionately impacts Maori
who are both overrepresented in care
and in the criminal justice system.
This outcome is inconsistent with Article three of TE or TGI
and undermines commitments to equitable outcomes.
So we've, we've
provided extensive, um, recommendations for
what we think should happen to prov, um, to create
a meaningful redress system that is accessible fear,
trauma informed and centered on survivors,
and we encourage the committee to, um, recommend
that the bill is, um, rewritten to align
with these purposes.
Thank you.
Um, thank, thank you for that.
I might just, um, ask the first question.
I don't see any bids yet. Uh,
we've got a couple minutes left.
Sure. Um, so the bill, as you say, does, uh,
create a presumption against, um, redress for someone
who has been convicted of a serious violence
or, um, sexual offense
and has served, been sentenced to a sentence
of at least five years in prison.
So that's, that's quite a serious offense if someone's been
sent to at least five years imprisonment.
Mm-hmm. Is it your view that that should be relevant? Yes.
What, what, uh, offense someone has been convicted of
and what's, what harms they've,
they've themselves caused the community
in terms of the redress,
I mean, I think there is a very clear,
and I missed speaking to it, the very clear
and acknowledged connection between people's experience
of abuse and care and later criminal offending.
I think also that people
who have spent their time in prison have served their time
for the harm that they have done.
And, um, redress is not a reward, it is an acknowledgement
of the injustice that that person has suffered
and that stands regardless of
what might happen subsequently.
Um, it is, it is, um,
a step towards acknowledging harm done.
And, um, you know, I I also acknowledge
that there is this framing
around bringing the system into disrepute.
The system is in disrepute.
It ha it is, the redress system is a reflection
of the state's need to address its own failures.
So to pass that on to, um, survivors who, who have then,
um, already been pen penalized by criminal,
by the criminal justice system to penalize them again,
is, is unjust.
Um, thank you. I think we, um, are at time.
Um, but thank, thank you for coming
and making a solution to sleep this afternoon.
Appreciate it. Cool.
Thank.
Yeah, right.
Our next, uh, submitter is, um, children's commissioner.
Good afternoon, doctor A, um, thank you
for appearing in front of the committee this afternoon.
So we have 10 minutes with you this afternoon.
Um, the time is yours
As Children's commissioner.
I am the independent advocate for all of RO
and New Zealand's 1.23 million children under the age of 18.
Uh, and all children and young people under the age of,
Oh, Do you want me to,
Sorry, could I just just check everyone
here online can hear you.
Okay. Yep. No, great. Thank you. Sorry. Concerning
As Children's Commissioner,
I'm the independent statutory advocate for all
of our nation's children under the age of 18,
and all children and young people under the age of 25
who have been in or who are in the care and
or custody of the state.
I'm an independent Crown entity
and I lead my team at
Manana Children's Commissioner this evening.
I begin by acknowledging the gravity of the subject in front
of us, the redress system for Abuse and Care.
Bill. I believe it's crucial that we remember the scale of
what we are talking about
and the humans at the very heart of it, the Royal Commission
of Inquiry estimated
that 655,000 people were in care
between 1950
and 2019 of this group,
an estimated 256,000 children,
young people and adults were abused
and neglected right here in New Zealand by the very people
who were responsible
for protecting them when they came into their care.
The state and faith-based institutions.
This number equates to nearly 40%
of those in care over this time, having been harmed tonight,
I wish to again acknowledge all of those survivors in mohu,
those who are living today and those who have passed on.
I want to acknowledge the courage
and strength of all
of those almost 3000 survivors in Mahu
who shared their testimonies of abuse, violence, and harm
and associated profound detrimental impacts
that they have experienced and those survivors
and Mohu who did not get to share their experiences
with the Royal Commission.
As Children's Commissioner, I pay close attention
to the findings of the Royal Commission of, um, inquiry.
I pay close attention to them because they are a chilling
and urgent reminder of the power that the state
and institutions entrusted with the care of children
and young people hold and wield.
These findings are a reminder of the urgency
with which we must work collectively every day to ensure
that these harms do not continue to occur for children
and young people in the care of the state and institutions.
Today. The findings of the Royal Commission will continue
to underpin my independent advocacy for all children
and young people in the care and
or custody of the state today
and tomorrow as a designated national preventative
mechanism under the optional protocol
to the Convention against torture.
I am very mindful of the role that together
with my team at Manam Moana, I play to provide one aspect
of oversight today of the systems across the state care
and youth justice facilities, youth mental health,
forensic facilities,
and youth intellectual disability facilities with the aim
of preventing harm for children
and young people in this work, the findings
of the Royal Commission of Inquiry Loom large serving
as a constant reminder of the necessity of the work that we
and other op cap national preventative mechanisms
and other parts of the wider oversight system are doing.
The Royal Commission of Inquiry made very clear findings
that Maori Pacific Disabled neurodiverse,
mentally distressed and rainbow people
were overrepresented in experiencing abuse and care.
As children's commissioner, I am very, very mindful
of the fact that abuse and harm
and state care is a contemporary
and ongoing issue right now with hundreds
of ANA in state care still experiencing abuse,
violence, and neglect annually.
Today in the year 2025, we must face up to the fact
that Una Maori, Ana Maori, and Pacific
and Pacific are still overrepresented
in experiencing harm in the state care
and protection system.
I share these reflections with you tonight
and in the context of this bill,
because they highlight the fact that
where the state perpetuates harm on its citizens,
on the children, and young people in its care,
it has failed in its duties
to those children and young people.
It follows as a central tenant of the law that the state
and institutions who have caused this harm
must then fulfill it.
Its and their duties to provide redress
to those children and young people.
And at its heart, that is what this belt is about.
In the words of Ahi, who has experienced harm in the care
of the state in more recent times, words
that were shared in the position paper published last year,
and I quote more than anything, we need accountability.
That when failures are glaring
and recommendations are made to fix the failures
that these recommendations are acted on,
evidenced and maintained.
As children's commissioner, I strongly support the words
of that ranta.
I urge that legislation
to provide a redress system in response to the findings
of the Royal Commission of Inquiry
must uphold the full findings of the Royal Commission
and the intent of the recommendations that have been made.
This is crucial to provide holistic redress
for survivors in mahu
and to ensure that the intergenerational impacts of abuse
and care are acknowledged.
Acknowledged. As many of the witness testimonies
of survivors in Mohu
before the Royal Commission highlighted the impacts
of abuse in state care, they are not purely historical.
They continue today
because these impacts, they are deeply intergenerational.
The trauma, social dislocation
and harm reverberate through children
and young people today, hanau and entire communities.
The opportunity of getting this legislation right
and ensuring a holistic centered
scheme, this opportunity that we have as a nation right now,
it is a profound opportunity.
I think it is really well summed up in this quote
from a care experience.
Ranga Tahi who in 2023 stated when talking about
the reform of the redress system stated,
and I quote again, a different ran.
This is a once in a lifetime opportunity for us
to recognize the failures of the state
and to acknowledge the lifelong
and intergenerational effect
that this has had on survivors of abuse.
The state has harmed generations of my hanau,
and this is a chance to bring some form
of justice and recognition.
I entered the care of the state at age of five,
and I left at 17.
I began my advocacy career the moment I left the system.
I am very concerned
as children's commissioner about the message
that this bill in its current form, sends to survivors, mahu
and children and young people
who are in the care of the state.
I urge that this bill should not proceed
in its current form.
It fails to deliver a comprehensive, holistic redress system
that survivors and the Royal Commission
of Inquiry have called for and recommended.
I am very concerned about the discriminatory impact
of the bill on Mahu Maori and their whanau,
and that the bill does not acknowledge the realities
as laid bare in the Royal Commission's final report
of the direct connection between abuse
and the care of the state
and criminal offending later in life.
For some mahu
and survivors, I urge
that all survivors in mohu must receive redress without
discrimination and that a
system is established with urgency.
This is needed not only to provide redress
for historical harms caused by the state
and faith-based institutions,
but to ensure a system
that is robust on an intergenerational basis,
acknowledging the reality that harm
and the care of the state is still continuing today,
despite the fact that all children in our country
have a basic right to grow up safe, free from all forms
of violence, abuse, and harm.
Thank you, Dr. Quin.
Uh, we we're over time so we don't have time for questions
that, uh, thank you for making submission
to money this afternoon.
Thank you. Our next one is, uh, network for survivors
of Faith-Based Schools and Charitable Trust.
Okay, thank you.
Good enough.
Network for survivors.
Yeah, please, yeah, see if you've got any support people
with you, welcome to take a seat with you as well if want.
Oh, thank you. You
Guys wanna take a seat too?
Yes. Yeah, there's a couple of issue chairs there, so
you want
Good, good afternoon.
Welcome. So we've, we've got five minutes with you,
but I i we could probably squeeze a little bit extra time if
you've, if you've got a few extra words to say.
Um, ua uh, thank you to the select committee
for having me here today to talk about the amendment.
Bill, uh, my ua,
um, I'm the chair for the network of survivors
and faith-based schools in tmu.
I support over 550 faith-based survivors.
I founded this network using my lived experiences
to help survivors navigate the legal system to seek, uh,
justice and redress in terms of my survivorship.
I'm a faith-based survivor.
I'm currently involved in litigation against a former
teacher at Shiloh Christian Academy for sexual assault
and abuse for over a decade for me
and for the survivors that I support.
The outcome of this bill is not practical.
It will directly impact our lives.
Today I wanna focus on two clauses
that must be removed if this redress system is to be fair,
trauma informed, and to stop the crown from further abuse.
Firstly, I wanna talk about the first clause was
to the presumption against financial redress for survivors
with serious convictions.
This clause creates a two-tier system That abuse them
as children, and then a double whammy,
which punishes them from reacting to that trauma.
The Royal Commission was clear, survivors
who experienced severe abuse are most likely
to experience criminalization, imprisonment, addiction,
homelessness, and serious mental illness and distress.
The crown abused these children, failed them as adults,
and so it needs to stop,
stop viewing redress as a reward,
stop using the redress system as moral judgment.
Start, uh, acknowledging the harm by the crown caused
to children who were looked after by the crown.
And, um, and also in churches
comparably, comparably, including Australia, Ireland,
and Canada, do not exclude survivors from redress on the
basis of criminal convictions.
If RO adopts this, clo this clause, we will become out
of step in an international outlier.
My second point about the second clause is around immunity
for state agency.
Apologies in the court system.
An apology cannot be relied on as a genuine apology
if it cannot be used through the courts.
Survivors are required to be fully transparent
and redress processes often having to relive the most,
the most traumatic experiences of their lives.
The crown must be held to the same standard.
A trauma informed system does not protect institutions.
It protects survivors from further abuse.
Finally, in terms of equity
and the treaty implications, we know that from,
from the Royal Commission findings
that Maori are overrepresented in crown care
and remain overrepresented in the criminal justice system.
These clauses, this amendment bill,
will disproportionately exclude Maori survivors
and further embed inequity into the redress system.
This is inconsistent with TI or Waitangi with equity.
And the purpose of this bill,
my request is simple and specific.
Stop. Please stop the presumption against financial redress
for survivors with serious convictions.
Stop immunity for state government agency apologies.
Start checking that this bill aligns
with the Royal Commission International precedent
and trauma-informed practice start up
and continue to start upholding a system
that treats all survivors equitably, especially those
that are most harm and those with convictions.
There's no aversion of justice where children are harmed,
they enter the just justice system
and then are told you no longer qualify for redress
because of what your trauma
that the crown brought upon you did to you.
This is not justice, it's not fairness,
and it should not be the legacy of this parliament.
Thank you.
Any questions? Thank you very much for that.
That's, uh, I think it's very clear,
succinct submissions made your points
very well, so thank you very much.
Appreciate it. Um, I I just,
I guess the only question I would ask is, um, um,
and I asked at the beginning, it's just, you know, the,
the government's obviously concerned.
Um, well firstly that it, that it, um, acknowledges
and makes right as best as it can.
You know, you can't change the past but can try
and acknowledge and, and,
and provide some, um, redress for it.
But there is a concern about the,
the whole system being born
and disrepute for those who have committed really serious
offenses, um, against others.
And it doesn't rule it out completely,
but it does create a presumption.
Um, this, this proposed legislation would create a
presumption at the first instance that would have
to be rebutted using legal language, um, by anyone who was,
you know, had committed that really serious offense
that meant, um, that been sentenced
to five years or more imprisonment.
But is, you've made your point clearly though, I think, and,
and your response to that.
So I don't think there's any, any confusion on
our behalf. So thank you.
You are welcome. Any other questions?
Yes. Oh, Thank you. Um, thank you for your submission.
Do you think that it's double jeopardy to exclude survivors
of abuse and care who are, um,
currently doing time, um, to be excluded from redress?
Do you think it's a double jeopardy punishing twice
Double jeopardy doesn't work like that.
It's a double whammy. It's punishment twice over,
so it's continued harm.
I'm trained in organizational psychology, so what we,
we would say in terms
of my practice is we would say it is continued abuse,
um, and continued harm.
What I'm saying is that we need
to prevent it by stopping it.
This bill will continue that.
Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you very much.
Thank you for coming this afternoon. Appreciate it.
Our next, um, submitter is, uh,
max Marshman, I believe in person.
Check Max is here. Was it you Max? Pardon? You Max? Yes.
Oh great. Oh, please say, please grab a seat.
Uh, good afternoon Max. Um, thank you for, uh,
coming and make submission.
My name's. So, um, when you're ready.
We've got, uh, five minutes with you and Okay.
Let know get underway.
Thank you chair. Thank you. Um, members of the panel.
I'm grateful for the opportunity to speak.
I am concerned about therapy being offered
to one group involving drugs
and surgery, presenting people with simple solutions
that do not address their real or underlying problems.
It's not good therapy. Instead, I believe, um,
in therapy we need to resist the urge to go
for simplest solutions.
I believe that this is driven by an ideology
that is both professional and political.
There are two unwritten rules.
The first rule say there are statements you cannot say.
And the second rule states there are unspoken statements
that you must never say allowed.
It isn't true that every problem comes down
to the experience that happened 50
or 60 years ago when someone had sex
with a mechanic down the road
and their life has been terrible since
because of it, the effect has been a tendency
to undermine people's ability to ask simple questions.
If a man has sex with a, a person under 16, it is always,
um, probably a person has sex with a person under 16.
It is always a terrible thing.
A young person has sex with an older person.
It is always, is always a terrible thing.
The law is a servant of culture, yet we realize
that sometimes the law is at odds with human behavior.
Breaking this rule is to violate the sets
of beliefs which governs society and academia.
Academia proximity to
orthodoxy is often valued over three free thought
and academics may see their role as one of advocacy.
If I looked at how gay culture is different from
before, pre-law reform,
gay relationships look now look conventional.
The belief in being born this way has
been replaced by identity.
With the initial law reform abuse,
which happened earlier on in the homosexual law,
emancipatory people were aware of the social failure
as it was with misreporting over cases involving the newer
immigrant groups in the uk.
We wanted to make them comfortable
because it was, it was the kind thing to do.
It is ne it wa is never a perfect process.
Fortunately, we now recognize domestic violence, violence
inside gay partnerships.
The intellectual world of the sixties
and seventies, which inhabited gay culture has gone with it.
Its ability to critique being replaced
by something too shallow.
But what are the, what are the mistakes?
Is it all trans identity?
No, it is introducing a problem which it wrongly prescribes.
Many have come, many have come to the belief it was possible
for other groups because the sexual orientation,
which a component for gay men would happen for them
would've paved the way
for a more informed discussion about minor attraction.
It isn't necessary that they are spurred embodied
inside a wrong body.
Francis F's work the end of history in it.
He believed the west had found the perfect system
for business and commerce,
other grand narratives having had failed.
If I look, we are not in heaven.
Yes, we have nice things,
but I don't think that we are there yet.
Are we likely to change soon? No.
In fact, the scope go ga goating we see is
a symptom of the crisis.
The establishment's anxiety about
how it doesn't believe in its own ieg legitimacy.
Uh, when people make stupid mistakes,
they reveal this anxiety.
Here's what you do. You talk honestly while I'm prepared
that not everything will change overnight.
I want to offer my voice.
We don't know data of populations for obvious reasons.
The idea of not speaking is frightening.
And you know how easy it is for someone to hurt you.
Um, let's get a discourse that is honest.
Um, thank you Max for coming to speak with us today.
Can I, um, just to be clear about your position on the bill,
do you support the redress as it's, um,
proposed in this bill?
Uh, yeah, generally, uh, most of it, most
of the content has to do, um, do with, I mean, I'm not the,
and people who are in positions where they're employed
and they haven't, they've acted, they've been bad actors.
And so yes, the employer had an obligation to go
and, um, should have to, to supervise them.
And that, that has, that's, that's failed.
Well, thank, thank you Max.
Go making session the committee this afternoon.
Thank you.
Process, the process going.
So just ask for the, if we could just, uh,
we just, um, if we could ask the room to be clear.
We've just got one submitter in private
and then we'll then we'll go back in public
session in, in a few minutes time.
We've got two in, that's about 10 minutes time.
We'll go back in public session. Okay.
I just need that,
Sorry. Are we leaving
this one?
Was it? Sorry. Yes. Are
We leaving this one and rejoining?
Yes. Sorry, I wasn't really clear.
Um, if we could go into the private zoom link
and then we'll hear.